Ramcharan Kushwaha vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 7 February 2018 THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH 1 MCRC No.26033 2017 Govind Singh Sisodiya Vs. State of M.P. MCRC No.18113 2017 Ramcharan Kushwaha Vs. State of M.P. and another Jabalpur Dated 07 02 2018 Shri Prashant Singh Senior Advocate with Shri Manas Verma Counsel for the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya. Shri K.K. Kushwaha Counsel for the applicant Ramcharan. Shri Vivek Lakhera Public Prosecutor for the State. Shri Yogesh Kumar Chaurasiya Advocate for respondent No.2 Bhagirath. With the consent of the parties heard finally. These two applications under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. have been filed for quashing the F.I.R. in Crime No. 512 2013 registered at Police Station Kotwali Distt. Tikamgarh for offence under Sections 420 46 468 and 471 of I.P.C. The necessary facts for the disposal of the present applications in short are that the applicants are practicing Lawyers. The applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya claims himself to be having a long standing of 39 years of active practice in the Bar whereas the applicant Ramcharan Claims himself to be the Associate Advocate of Govind Singh Sisodiya. According to the prosecution case the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya purchased land bearing Khasra No.215 882 area admeasuring 1.619 hectares In short will be referred as disputed property from one Mohan Kachhi vide registered sale deed dated 22 6 1996. After execution of said sale deed a correction deed was also executed on 24 2 1997 mentioning therein that inadvertently the complete Khasra Number was not mentioned in the sale deed dated 22 6 1996 and the same may be read as Khasra No.215 882 2. The applicant Govind THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH 2 MCRC No.26033 2017 Govind Singh Sisodiya Vs. State of M.P . MCRC No.18113 2017 Ramcharan Kushwaha Vs. State of M.P. and another Singh Sisodiya claims himself to be a bonafide purchaser of the disputed property. The complainant Bhagirath Tiwari is the resident of Tikamgarh and according to the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya he was closely associated with a political personality Bhaiya Raja Ashok Veer Vikram Singh. The complainant had misappropriated an amount of Rs.1.5 lacs of Bhaiya Raja and fled away and started living in village Chhidari along with his maternal uncle Mathura Prasad Dixit. Later on he projected himself to be a member of the gang of Dacoit Chittar Singh and expressed his inclination to surrender before the police authorities. After near about 6 years he submitted an affidavit claiming himself to be a surrendered dacoit of the gang of Chittar Singh and claimed allotment of 15 acres of land from Collector Tikamgarh as per the policy formulated by the State Govt. for the rehabilitation of the dacoits who have surrendered. Accordingly on 30 3 1993 the Collector Tikamgarh allotted 6.110 hectares of agricultural land to the complainant Bhagirath Tiwari including the disputed property. An allotment order dated 13 3 1993 was also issued by the Tahsildar in favour of the complainant. It is submitted by the Counsel for the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya that on 23 1 2016 the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya has made a complaint to the senior police officers that the complainant has wrongly claimed himself to be a surrendered dacoit and has wrongly got 15 acres of land allotted under the policy formulated by the State Govt. for the rehabilitation of the dacoits. However it is claimed that the said complaint was not properly investigated enquired by the police authorities. It is THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH 3 MCRC No.26033 2017 Govind Singh Sisodiya Vs. State of M.P . MCRC No.18113 2017 Ramcharan Kushwaha Vs. State of M.P. and another further submitted that various litigation are pending to the effect that whether the land purchased by the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya is a part of the land allotted to the complainant Bhagirath or not The Tahsildar mutated the name of the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya in the revenue record which was challenged by the complainant Bhagirath and the appeal was allowed and at present the revision filed by the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya before the Board of Revenue is pending. It is further submitted that the complainant Bhagirath Tiwari has made a false allegation that the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya on the basis of the forged resolution purportedly passed by the Gram Sabha got his name mutated in the revenue records after tempering the revenue documents. It is further submitted that the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya is a bonafide purchaser and believing the version of the seller Mohan Kachhi he had purchased the land in question. Before registration of the Sale deed it was obligatory on the part of the Sub Registrar to verify the title of the seller and once the Sub Registrar had registered the sale deed then the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya was under a bonafide impression that he has rightly purchased the disputed property. It is further submitted that the police after concluding the investigation has filed a charge sheet and on the date of filing of the present application charges were not framed and the case is pending as Sessions Trial No.167 2017 in the Court of A.S.J. Tikamgarh. In nutshell it is the contention of the applicant that the complainant Bhagirath by playing fraud has got 15 acres of land allotted under the scheme formulated by the State THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH 4 MCRC No.26033 2017 Govind Singh Sisodiya Vs. State of M.P . MCRC No.18113 2017 Ramcharan Kushwaha Vs. State of M.P. and another Govt. for rehabilitation of the dacoits. However it was admitted by the Counsel for the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya that the allotment order in favour of the complainant is still in existence and has not been set aside and except the oral submissions of the applicant that the complainant had obtained the allotment of the land by playing fraud there is nothing to substantiate the said submission. It is further admitted that the land in question was allotted to the complainant prior to the sale deed and thus it is clear that Mohan Kachhi was not the owner of the disputed property. So far as the applicant Ramcharan is concerned it is submitted by his Counsel that he is working as an Associate Advocate with Govind Singh Sisodiya and under his instructions and in good faith he had signed the sale deed as a witness and he has nothing to do with the sale transaction which had taken place between Govind Singh Sisodiya and Mohan Kachhi. Per contra it is submitted by the Counsel for the State as well as the complainant that the complainant is an ex dacoit having surrendered before the Govt. and thus under the rehabilitation scheme formulated by the State Govt. 15 acres of land was allotted to the complainant Bhagirath and the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya by forging the resolution of the Gram Sabha as well as by forging other revenue records got a sale deed executed in respect of the disputed property in his name whereas Mohan Kachhi was never the owner of the disputed property and thus there is prima facie material against the applicants warranting their prosecution for offence THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH 5 MCRC No.26033 2017 Govind Singh Sisodiya Vs. State of M.P . MCRC No.18113 2017 Ramcharan Kushwaha Vs. State of M.P. and another under Sections 420 467 468 and 471 of I.P.C. Heard the learned Counsels for the parties. The contention of the Counsel for the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya is that various litigation are pending between the parties over the disputed property therefore it is clear that the dispute is mainly of civil in nature and therefore no one should be allowed to convert the civil dispute into a criminal dispute. It is further submitted that in fact it is the complainant himself who has fraudulently obtained the allotment of 15 acres of land and therefore no offence has been committed by the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya by purchasing the disputed property. It is further submitted that the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya is a bonafide purchaser. The submissions made by the Counsel for the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya cannot be accepted being misconceived and hence they are rejected. So far as the first contention of the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya that in fact it is the complainant who has fraudulently got 15 acres of land allotted to himself under the scheme formulated by the State Govt. for rehabilitation of the dacoits is concerned it is fairly conceded by the Counsel for the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya that the allotment of land in favour of the complainant Bhagirath Tiwari has not been cancelled by the State Govt. Thus it is clear that the claim of the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya that the complainant Bhagirath had fraudulently obtained the allotment of 15 acres of land is nothing but a self imaginary and baseless submission hence the first submission made by the Counsel THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH 6 MCRC No.26033 2017 Govind Singh Sisodiya Vs. State of M.P . MCRC No.18113 2017 Ramcharan Kushwaha Vs. State of M.P. and another for the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya is hereby rejected. It is next contended by the Counsel for the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya that the Tahsildar had mutated his name in the revenue record which was challenged by the complainant Bhagirath and the order of the Tahsildar was set aside. The applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya has filed a revision which is pending before the Board of Revenue and hence it is clear that the litigation is pending between the parties over the disputed property therefore by lodging the F.I.R. the complainant has tried to give colour of criminal case to a civil dispute which is not permissible. To buttress his contentions the Counsel for the applicant has relied upon the judgments of the Supreme Court passed in the cases of Joseph Salvaraj A. Vs. State of Gujarat and others reported in 2011 7 SCC 59 Indian Oil Corporation Vs. NEPC India Ltd and others reported in 2006 6 SCC 736 Uma Shankar Gopalika Vs. State of Bihar and another reported in 2005 10 SCC 336 and Inder Mohan Goswami and another Vs. State of Uttaranchal and others reported in 2007 12 SCC 1. The applicant in his entire application has nowhere mentioned that on what basis he came to a conclusion that Mohan Kachhi is the owner of the disputed property and how he agreed to enter into a sale transaction with said Mohan Kachhi. It is clear from the record that the land was already allotted to the complainant Bhagirath in the year 1993 whereas the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya claims to have purchased the disputed property in the year 1996 i.e. after the THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH 7 MCRC No.26033 2017 Govind Singh Sisodiya Vs. State of M.P . MCRC No.18113 2017 Ramcharan Kushwaha Vs. State of M.P. and another allotment in favour of the complainant. It is also the case of the prosecution that a forged resolution by the Gram Sabha was prepared for getting his name mutated in the revenue records and even the revenue documents were also interpolated. The Supreme Court in the case of Amit Kapoor Vs. Ramesh Chander reported in 2012 9 SCC 460 has held as under 27. Having discussed the scope of jurisdiction under these two provisions i.e. Section 397 and Section 482 of the Code and the fine line of jurisdictional distinction now it will be appropriate for us to enlist the principles with reference to which the courts should exercise such jurisdiction. However it is not only difficult but is inherently impossible to state with precision such principles. At best and upon objective analysis of various judgments of this Court we are able to cull out some of the principles to be considered for proper exercise of jurisdiction particularly with regard to quashing of charge either in exercise of jurisdiction under Section 397 or Section 482 of the Code or together as the case may be 27.1 Though there are no limits of the powers of the Court under Section 482 of the Code but the more the power the more due care and caution is to be exercised in invoking these powers. The power of quashing criminal proceedings particularly the charge framed in terms of Section 228 of the Code should be exercised very sparingly and with circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases. 27.2 The Court should apply the test as to whether the uncontroverted allegations as made from the record of the case and the documents submitted therewith prima facie establish the offence or not. If the allegations are so patently absurd and inherently improbable that no prudent person can ever reach such a THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH 8 MCRC No.26033 2017 Govind Singh Sisodiya Vs. State of M.P . MCRC No.18113 2017 Ramcharan Kushwaha Vs. State of M.P. and another conclusion and where the basic ingredients of a criminal offence are not satisfied then the Court may interfere. 27.3 The High Court should not unduly interfere. No meticulous examination of the evidence is needed for considering whether the case would end in conviction or not at the stage of framing of charge or quashing of charge. 27.4 Where the exercise of such power is absolutely essential to prevent patent miscarriage of justice and for correcting some grave error that might be committed by the subordinate courts even in such cases the High Court should be loath to interfere at the threshold to throttle the prosecution in exercise of its inherent powers. 27.5 Where there is an express legal bar enacted in any of the provisions of the Code or any specific law in force to the very initiation or institution and continuance of such criminal proceedings such a bar is intended to provide specific protection to an accused. 27.6 The Court has a duty to balance the freedom of a person and the right of the complainant or prosecution to investigate and prosecute the offender. 27.7 The process of the Court cannot be permitted to be used for an oblique or ultimate ulterior purpose. 27.8 Where the allegations made and as they appeared from the record and documents annexed therewith to predominantly give rise and constitute a civil wrong with no element of criminality and does not satisfy the basic ingredients of a criminal offence the court may be justified in quashing the charge. Even in such cases the court would not embark upon the critical analysis of the evidence. 27.9 Another very significant caution that the courts have to observe is that it cannot examine the facts evidence and materials on record to determine whether there is sufficient material on THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH 9 MCRC No.26033 2017 Govind Singh Sisodiya Vs. State of M.P . MCRC No.18113 2017 Ramcharan Kushwaha Vs. State of M.P. and another the basis of which the case would end in a conviction the court is concerned primarily with the allegations taken as a whole whether they will constitute an offence and if so is it an abuse of the process of court leading to injustice. 27.10 It is neither necessary nor is the court called upon to hold a full fledged enquiry or to appreciate evidence collected by the investigating agencies to find out whether it is a case of acquittal or conviction. 27.11 Where allegations give rise to a civil claim and also amount to an offence merely because a civil claim is maintainable does not mean that a criminal complaint cannot be maintained. 27.12 In exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 228 and or under Section 482 the Court cannot take into consideration external materials given by an accused for reaching the conclusion that no offence was disclosed or that there was possibility of his acquittal. The Court has to consider the record and documents annexed herewith by the prosecution. 27.13 Quashing of a charge is an exception to the rule of continuous prosecution. Where the offence is even broadly satisfied the Court should be more inclined to permit continuation of prosecution rather than its quashing at that initial stage. The Court is not expected to marshal the records with a view to decide admissibility and reliability of the documents or records but is an opinion formed prima facie. 27.14 Where the charge sheet report under Section 173 2 of the Code suffers from fundamental legal defects the Court may be well within its jurisdiction to frame a charge. 27.15 Coupled with any or all of the above where the Court finds that it would amount to abuse of process of the Code or that the interest of justice favours otherwise it may quash the charge. The power is to be exercised ex debito justitiae i.e. to do real and substantial THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH 10 MCRC No.26033 2017 Govind Singh Sisodiya Vs. State of M.P . MCRC No.18113 2017 Ramcharan Kushwaha Vs. State of M.P. and another justice for administration of which alone the courts exist. Ref. State of W.B. v. Swapan Kumar Guha 1982 1 SCC 561 Madhavrao Jiwajirao Scindia v. Sambhajirao Chandrojirao Angre 1988 1 SCC 692 Janata Dal v. H.S. Chowdhary 1992 4 SCC 305 Rupan Deol Bajaj v. Kanwar Pal Singh Gill 1995 6 SCC 194 G. Sagar Suri v. State of U.P. 2000 2 SCC 636 Ajay Mitra v. State of M.P. 2003 3 SCC 11 Pepsi Foods Ltd. v. Special Judicial Magistrate 1998 5 SCC 749 State of U.P. v. O.P. Sharma 1996 7 SCC 705 Ganesh Narayan Hegde v. S. Bangarappa 1995 4 SCC 41 Zandu Pharmaceutical Works Ltd. v. Mohd. Sharaful Haque 2005 1 SCC 122 Medchl Chemicals Pharma P Ltd. v. Biological E. Ltd. 2000 3 SCC 269 Shakson Belthissor v. State of Kerala 2009 14 SCC 466 V.V.S. Rama Sharma v. State of U.P. 2009 7 SCC 234 Chunduru Siva Ram Krishna v. Peddi Ravindra Babu 2009 11 SCC 203 Sheonandan Paswan v. State of Bihar 1987 1 SCC 288 State of Bihar v. P.P. Sharma 1992 Supp 1 SCC 222 Lalmuni Devi v. State of Bihar 2001 2 SCC 17 M. Krishnan v. Vijay Singh 2001 8 SCC 645 Savita v. State of Rajasthan 2005 12 SCC 338 and S.M. Datta v. State of Gujarat 2001 7 SCC 659. 16. These are the principles which individually and preferably cumulatively one or more be taken into consideration as precepts to exercise of extraordinary and wide plenitude and jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code by the High Court. Where the factual foundation for an offence has been laid down the courts should be reluctant and should not hasten to quash the proceedings even on the premise that one or two ingredients have not been stated or do not appear to be satisfied if there is THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH 11 MCRC No.26033 2017 Govind Singh Sisodiya Vs. State of M.P . MCRC No.18113 2017 Ramcharan Kushwaha Vs. State of M.P. and another substantial compliance to the requirements of the offence. Thus it is clear that where the criminal intent is present then the proceedings cannot be quashed merely on the ground that the dispute also involves civil dispute. Further in the case of K.G. Premshanker Vs. Inspector of Police reported in 2002 8 SCC 87 has held as under 31. Further the judgment order or decree passed in a previous civil proceeding if relevant as provided under Sections 40 and 42 or other provisions of the Evidence Act then in each case the court has to decide to what extent it is binding or conclusive with regard to the matter s decided therein. Take for illustration in a case of alleged trespass by A on B s property B filed a suit for declaration of its title and to recover possession from A and suit is decreed. Thereafter in a criminal prosecution by B against A for trespass judgment passed between the parties in civil proceedings would be relevant and the court may hold that it conclusively establishes the title as well as possession of B over the property. In such case A may be convicted for trespass. The illustration to Section 42 which is quoted above makes the position clear. Hence in each and every case the first question which would require consideration is whether judgment order or decree is relevant if relevant its effect. It may be relevant for a limited purpose such as motive or as a fact in issue. This would depend upon the facts of each case. 32. In the present case the decision rendered by the Constitution Bench in M.S. Sheriff case AIR 1954 SC 397 would be binding wherein it has been specifically held THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH 12 MCRC No.26033 2017 Govind Singh Sisodiya Vs. State of M.P . MCRC No.18113 2017 Ramcharan Kushwaha Vs. State of M.P. and another that no hard and fast rule can be laid down and that possibility of conflicting decision in civil and criminal courts is not a relevant consideration. The law envisages such an eventuality when it expressly refrains from making the decision of one court binding on the other or even relevant except for limited purpose such as sentence or damages . 33. Hence the observation made by this Court in V.M. Shah case 1995 5 SCC 767 that the finding recorded by the criminal court stands superseded by the finding recorded by the civil court is not correct enunciation of law. Further the general observations made in Karam Chand case 1970 3 SCC 694 are in context of the facts of the case stated above. The Court was not required to consider the earlier decision of the Constitution Bench in M.S. Sheriff case AIR 1954 SC 397 as well as Sections 40 to 43 of the Evidence Act. 34. In the present case after remand by the High Court civil proceedings as well as criminal proceedings are required to be decided on the evidence which may be brought on record by the parties. If the facts of the present case are considered it is the submission of the Counsel for the applicant that since his revision against the order setting aside the order of mutation is pending before the Board of Revenue therefore the criminal proceedings be quashed. So far as the mutation proceedings are concerned they do not finally adjudicate the title of the parties. Entry in revenue record is not the document of title. The Counsel for the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya has admitted that the land was allotted to the complainant THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH 13 MCRC No.26033 2017 Govind Singh Sisodiya Vs. State of M.P . MCRC No.18113 2017 Ramcharan Kushwaha Vs. State of M.P. and another Bhagirath Tiwari prior in time. The applicant has also not come forward with a case that how he was convinced that Mohan Kachhi was the owner of the disputed property. The land was allotted to the complainant Bhagirath by the State which clearly shows that the disputed property was initially a Govt. land which was allotted to the complainant under a scheme formulated by the State Govt. for rehabilitation of the Dacoits. Thus it is clear that the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya was not the bonafide purchaser. Further there is an allegation that the resolution of Gram Sabha was also forged by the applicant for getting his name mutated in the revenue records. Thus it cannot be inferred that the dispute is predominantly of civil in nature and no criminal intent is present. Thus the criminal prosecution cannot be quashed merely on the ground that a revision filed by the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya is pending before the Board of Revenue. Similarly the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya under the facts and circumstances of the case cannot be said to be a bonafide purchaser. It is next contended by the Counsel for the applicant that at the time of registration of the sale deed it was the duty of the Sub Registrar to verify the title of the seller and since it was not objected by the then Sub Registrar therefore the applicant Govind Singh Sisodiya was convinced that he is the bonafide purchaser. The submission made by the Counsel for the applicant is misconceived and hence liable to be rejected. The Counsel for the applicant could not point out any provision of law which necessitates the Sub Registrar to verify the title of the seller prior to registration of sale deed. On the THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH 14 MCRC No.26033 2017 Govind Singh Sisodiya Vs. State of M.P . MCRC No.18113 2017 Ramcharan Kushwaha Vs. State of M.P. and another contrary it is submitted by the counsel for the State that it is the duty of the Sub Registrar to verify that whether the document is properly stamped or not Thus where the document is properly stamped then the Sub Registrar has no authority to refuse the registration of the document. So far as the case of applicant Ramcharan is concerned it is submitted by his Counsel that the applicant Ramcharan was working as an Associate Advocate with Govind Singh Sisodiya and under the instructions of Govind Singh Sisodiya and in good faith he had signed the sale deed as a witness therefore he has not committed any offence and is liable to be discharged. Section 52 of I.P.C. defines Good Faith. Section 52 of I.P.C. reads as under Section 52 . Good Faith . Nothing is said to be done or believed in good faith which is done or believed without due care and attention. Thus it is clear that unless and until due care and attention is taken nothing can be said to have been done in good faith. In the present case it is not the case of the applicant Ramcharan that he had taken due care and attention earlier to signing the sale deed as a witness but he has stated that he had merely acted on the instructions of the co accused Govind Singh Sisodiya. This action on the part of the applicant Ramcharan cannot be said to have been done in good faith. Thus considering the totality of the facts and circumstances of the case this Court is of the considered opinion that there is sufficient material against the applicants THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH 15 MCRC No.26033 2017 Govind Singh Sisodiya Vs. State of M.P . MCRC No.18113 2017 Ramcharan Kushwaha Vs. State of M.P. and another warranting their prosecution for offence under Sections 420 467 468 and 471 of I.P.C. Thus neither the F.I.R. in crime No. 512 2013 registered at Police Station Kotwali Distt. Tikamgarh nor the further proceedings in Sessions Trial No.167 2017 pending in the Court of A.S.J. Tikamgarh can be quashed. Before parting with this order this Court finds it apposite to mention that the observations in this order have been made by this Court considering the limited scope of interference under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. The Trial Court is directed to decide the trial strictly on the basis of the evidence which would ultimately come on record without getting prejudiced by any of the observations made by this Court in this order. As the F.I.R. was lodged in the year 2013 and more than 4 years have already passed therefore the Trial Court is directed to expedite the Trial and should make all endeavour to decide the Trial as early as possible preferably within a period of 8 months from the date of receipt of the copy of this Order. The Trial Court is also expected not to adjourn the case without any reasonable cause. The applications i.e. M.Cr.C. No.26033 2017 Govind Singh Sisodiya and 18113.2017 Ramcharan fail and are hereby dismissed. The office is directed to immediately send the copy of this order to the Trial Court for necessary information and compliance. G.S. Ahluwalia Judge Arun Digitally signed by ARUN KUMAR MISHRA Date 2018.02.15 11 13 53 05 30